                                      Cyclokinetics

Cyclokinetics is a first principle model to solve the plasma turbulence transport problem.

Gyrokinetics is widely applied in plasma physics. However, this framework is limited to weak turbulence levels and low drift-wave frequencies because high-frequency gyro-motion is reduced by the gyro-phase averaging. In order to test where gyrokinetics breaks down, Waltz and Zhao developed a new theory, called cyclokinetics [R. E. Waltz and Zhao Deng, Phys. Plasmas 20, 012507 (2013)]. Cyclokinetics dynamically follows the high-frequency ion gyro-motion which is nonlinearly coupled to the low-frequency drift-waves interrupting and suppressing gyro-averaging. Cyclokinetics is valid in the high-frequency (ion cyclotron frequency) regime or for high turbulence levels. The ratio of the cyclokinetic perturbed distribution function over equilibrium distribution function δf/F can approach 1. 

This project presents, for the first time, a numerical simulation of nonlinear cyclokinetic theory for ions, and describes the first attempt to completely solve the ion gyro-phase motion in a nonlinear turbulence system. Simulations are performed [Zhao Deng and R. E. Waltz, accepted by Phys. Plasmas] in a local flux-tube geometry with the parallel motion and variation suppressed by using a newly developed code named rCYCLO, which is executed in parallel by using an implicit time-advanced Eulerian (or continuum) scheme [Zhao Deng and R. E. Waltz, accepted by Comp. Phys. Comm.]. A novel numerical treatment of the magnetic moment velocity space derivative operator guarantees accurate conservation of incremental entropy.

By comparing the more fundamental cyclokinetic simulations with the corresponding gyrokinetic simulations, the gyrokinetics breakdown condition is quantitatively tested. Gyrokinetic transport and turbulence level recover those of cyclokinetics at high relative ion cyclotron frequencies and low turbulence levels, as required. Cyclokinetic transport and turbulence level are found to be lower than those of gyrokinetics at high turbulence levels and low-Ω* values with stable ion cyclotron modes. The gyrokinetic approximation is found to break down when the density perturbation exceeds 20%, or when the ratio of nonlinear ExB frequency over ion cyclotron frequency exceeds 20%. This result indicates that the density perturbation of the Tokamak L-mode near-edge is not sufficiently large for breaking the gyro-phase averaging. For cyclokinetic simulations with sufficiently unstable ion cyclotron (IC) modes and sufficiently low Ω*~10, the high-frequency component of the cyclokinetic transport can exceed that of the gyrokinetic transport. However, the low-frequency component of the cyclokinetic transport does not exceed that of the gyrokinetic transport. For higher and more physically relevant Ω*≥50 values and physically realistic IC driving rates, the low-frequency component of the cyclokinetic transport remains smaller than that of the gyrokinetic transport. In conclusion, the “L-mode near-edge short-fall” phenomenon, observed in some low-frequency gyrokinetic turbulence transport simulations, does not arise owing to the nonlinear coupling of high-frequency ion cyclotron motion to low-frequency drift motion.
